more foreign Nationals are preparing to
leave Gaza through the Rafa Crossing
today at least 320 foreign passport
holders were evacuated on Wednesday
alongside dozens of severely injured
Palestinians around 7 and a half
thousand foreigners are expected to
leave over the next two weeks under a
deal broken by
Qatar these were some of the first
foreign passport holders to reach the
safety of Egyptian
soil on the other side hundreds were
hoping for their chance to cross but
only those on a list agreed by Israel
and Egypt would be allowed to do
so after more than 3 weeks under Israeli
bombardment and blockade people here
were desperate to
escape we are relying on God and hoping
we'll get out it's still our country and
we feel sad for it for its Destruction
for our friends and loved ones entire
family am were destroyed and erased all
martyred and if it weren't for what
happened we wouldn't
leave as well as those allowed to leave
for good Egyptian authorities have
agreed to a small number of medical
evacuations with ambulances crossing the
border to retrieve the severely
injured once in Egypt they were taken to
nearby hospitals for
treatment gaza's own medical facilities
are desperately short of even basic
suppli eyes and are overflowing with the
injured and while more Aid trucks were
allowed through once again on Wednesday
Aid groups say it's only a tiny fraction
of what entered daily before the Hamas
terrorist
attacks the head of the un's relief
agency in Gaza stressed that residents
were in urgent need after he crossed
into Rafa for a
visit and I was Chuck by the fact that
everyone there was asking for food was
asking for water we I saw almost every
children trying to express their way
that they need to eat they need to have
water um I never ever have seen
something similar in Gaza when I came
before after conflict Egyptian officials
say more people will be able to leave
over the coming days but it's unclear
just how long the Border will remain
open to foreign passport
holders what is certain is that unless
Egypt's government lets Palestinians
cross to for the vast majority of those
trapped in Gaza Escape will remain
impossible well for more on the
situation on the ground let's now speak
to journalist ham belusa he's reporting
from Gaza there how more people are
preparing to leave Gaza today tell us
more
yes 400
um Internationals or Palestinian holding
for forign passports along with the 60
um with Palestinians would
leave through Rafa to Egypt and maybe to
other destination later on um yesterday
there was another 400 or a bit less
along with the 54 uh Palestinian wounded
um with their escorts left to to
Egyptian
Hospitals now has any Aid reached Gaza
today today no no not yet but expected
some trucks to come in um over 250 or a
bit more um arrived in in the previous
days um and more expected to to be
received today um including uh frood uh
water and medical
supply is this Aid you spoke about the
250 so far 250 trucks is this Aid
beginning to make a difference for
civilians well in some places some areas
H one schools like um that people
displaced people are taking as a shilter
they're receiving more Aid some some
organizations are distributed but making
use or a concrete difference it's not I
mean still we are talking about a huge
number of displaced people with are from
the north GAA City or even those people
who are in this area from the border
areas or other places po people they are
still struggling of of getting the aid
the distribution mechanism is not clear
to everybody when when when I'm asking
coordinator people about that they don't
know sometimes they get some aid from
here and there but um it's uh still uh
it's it's not easy because there is no
cooking gas so people are not cooking in
their homes no water for with for
washing or even uh for a drink H Bela
they're reporting from Gaza thank you
very much
hin thank
you and joining me now is hadil kazaz
she is the regional gender justice
coordinator for Oxfam International
based in rala welcome could you please
tell us about your organization's work
in Gaza right now and where you are
seeing the biggest gaps in humanitarian
assistance unfortunately our
organization cannot move in on the
ground we have 33 staff members and
their families are Under Fire uh there
is very very difficult situation for our
partners we have a large network of
Partners who cannot do anything
basically because of the continuous
bombardment across Gaza Strip in the
South as well as in the north uh
therefore we depend only on the uh
numbers that come from un uh and these
are alarming they are basically on in
the minute situation humanitarian
situation is deteriorating very quickly
uh We've we have estimates that food in
Gaza is not will not last more than S
days uh the number of trucks that
entered 227 is half of what would have
been entering Gaza on a daily basis now
we are on the 27th day of the war and
this is only half a day worth of
supplies not all of them is food we hear
from families and friends including mine
that the cues to water drinking water
and is getting longer uh if you want to
get a um like a back of bread you have
to queue at least five six hours and if
you if you find it if you are lucky
enough my sister was telling me that she
queued for 6 hours yesterday and then
she had to go back without bread because
the bakery ran out of it uh basically we
are seeing a humanitarian situation that
we have never witnessed in all of our
interventions globally uh where people
are starved they people are lacking
access to water medication uh basic
necessities and these these are one of
the mostly highest
dense places across the world basically
uh so yeah it's it's very alarming very
concerning honestly now now your work at
Oxfam normally focuses on gender justice
when you look at the situation unfolding
in Gaza are there special considerations
that need to be made for women's safety
and
well-being yeah a huge consideration a
huge consideration on all aspects the
basic needs of women uh feminine hygiene
and the need for dignity kits is
alarming we are hearing stories about
women giving birth in very in in very
infected and uh not very uh clean
conditions uh if there's any
complication for a birth and there are
5,500 00 women who are expected to give
birth this month only in the Gaza stb uh
we hear about uh young girls taking
hormonal uh medications to prevent their
period from coming because there are not
enough uh toilets or bathrooms around
evacuation centers uh we are hearing
devastating stories about last yesterday
I was in a call where uh someone from
Gaza was describing how women 11 women
arrived to the shelter they walked from
from the Gaza Strip from jabalia where
the bombardment happened
toal and they arrived in very very bad
condition they told him we were 20 by
the way the by the time we crossed our
own Street we became 11 they came
without anything without any food any
clothes uh any already they were in
their homes in bad conditions but can
you imagine the also the psychological
stress of running almost 20 kilometers
to go to a safe space and then there's
no food to be offered for them in this
shelter there's no place this guy said
we don't have any place to host them
even because it's overcrowded they they
have at least 20 to 30 people in a small
room 2 by3 uh square meters so it's it's
uh alarming terrible conditions that
you're describing there it's terrible
conditions yeah well thank you so much
for joining us on DW um with that update
that is kazaz with Oxfam International
we really appreciate your
time Mike noise is with action a UK
that's an international charity that
works with women and girls living in
poverty we asked him how medical staff
are coping with the humanitarian crisis
in
gasa and for more on this uh let's speak
to Mike noise he's the head of
humanitarian response at action a UK who
uh joins us now from London Mike
according to the organization doctors
with our bord
there are around 20,000 injured people
in Gaza at the moment how is medical
staff there
coping yeah thank you for having us on
today uh it's a very very difficult
situation in Gaza at the moment for for
everyone including for medical staff as
I'm sure you know we've been working
with a number of hospitals for for a
long time in Gaza well before this
conflict started uh well before this
upsurging violence started and what
we're hearing from them at the moment is
just the sheer impossibility of working
uh not well overwhelmed by the numbers
of injured but also continued to try and
deliver on on their case workk we work
particularly with a maternity hospital
that is still trying to deliver
cesarians still trying to look after
babies and incubators in this situation
they've had enormous problems with
supplies of materials but especially
with the need to keep the generators
going so that they've got electricity to
power uh incubators and ventilators and
to to keep the lights on so that they
can do their surgery it's an almost
impossible situation for them we know
some hospitals have already ceased
functioning others are on the verge of
it now the Raa border crossing is now
open for injured people as we've heard
earlier in in our program um how are
they being
prioritized I think that's in the hands
of organizations like the the red
Cresent society and and the UN it's not
something that our hospitals are
involved involved with so I'm sorry I
can't really help you on that but I
think the key thing to say is these are
still very small numbers of people
getting out of Gaza compared to the the
numbers of injured to the to the numbers
needing medical treatment and and to the
impact that this war has had so far on
the hospitals Who Who Are You Know in
danger of no longer functioning there
really is no longer an effective medical
service in Gaza for for the two and a
half million people who are who are yet
under constant bombardment
now there is still though the
Palestinian Ministry of Health which is
run by Hamas um are they in any way
involved in Aid distribution are you
talking to them working with
them our hospitals are independent
hospitals that that that are not part of
the Ministry of Health structures in G
in
Gaza that uh we've always worked with
that continue to try and deliver
services to the population that's the
most important thing at this time it's
it's about working with and for the
Ordinary People of Gaza they're the
people who are at the receiving end of
all this they're the ones that are
suffering most now we've heard reports
also that the water in Gaza is
contaminated U so where are people
getting water
from they get they're getting it from
wherever they can and it it's a real
real struggle more than anything else
this is the message we're we're hearing
from our colleagues and and and
collaborators in Gaza it yeah there are
so many challenges that people are
facing right now but um the biggest of
all is is water uh yeah there's almost
no clean water many many people are
drinking dirty water we've had multiple
reports of people feeling yeah resorting
to drinking sea water uh or salt water
from from from Wells close to the Sea as
it's the the only option available to
them and as as anyone will know that is
not something people can sustain in the
long term we've had you we know people
are trying to do yeah local desalination
which is effectively means boiling up
seaw waterer and catching the
condensation but you can't do that
without
fuel Mike no them the head of
humanitarian response at action Aid UK
thank you very
much thank you very much andw
correspondent Rebecca rtis joins us now
from stot in southern Israel Rebecca can
you give us an update on Israel's
offenses
yeah well it's very difficult we're
standing here in SRO you can see the
Gaza bordered behind us it's about 2
kilomet away we can hear all the bombing
uh but we know from the Israeli military
that they have said that they've
actually broken through hamas's first
line of defense and that they are
pushing through toward Gaza City we
believe the plan is that they're trying
to encircle the city we know of course
that they've been carrying out uh very
heavy air bombardments and they're also
attacking as I said on the on the ground
we've got ground combat and also Naval
forces bombing from the sea so very much
pushing on with their plan uh there's
been an update of the amount of uh IDF
soldiers that have been killed since the
ground Invasion began uh almost a week
ago now uh and that number has risen to
17 We Believe 16 actually inside Gaza
and one uh that has died subsequently
from his wounds out from from fighting
outside in the early days uh after the
attack so we're seeing the death toll on
the Israeli side the soldiers uh Rising
we've had words from the military Chiefs
and also from Benjamin nyaho saying for
telling Israelis to expect a long road
ahead that this is going to be a very
tough battle and that's certainly what
we're seeing play
out now Gaza being of course at the
center of attention right now the
military activities but we're also
hearing of clashes in the West Bank what
do you know about
that yeah violence has been pretty I
mean we know that clashes have been
happening of course sporadic and ongoing
always and in the last 18 months or so
there's been an uptick of Israeli raids
military raids on many areas in the West
Bank as they try and quash what they say
is militant activity um but we've seen
that really pick up since October 7 uh
since October 7 there's been more than
120 deaths of Palestinians killings
either in IDF raids uh or by settler
violence which is also peaked quite a
lot spiked quite a lot I should say
since October 7 we've even had uh
ministers calling for gun licenses to be
eased and more guns to be handed out
promising that they wouldn't in fact
Supply people with weapons so that they
could you know quote unquote protect
themselves or carry out attacks on
Palestinians this morning though we also
saw an Israeli settler was killed by
Palestinian or thought to be Palestinian
gunfire in the West Bank and the IDF are
conducting a hunt for the shooter so
definitely a very tense situation there
uh and Palestinians being displaced from
their homes as well and Roads cut off
lots of uh um uh checkpoints extra
checkpoints set up making movement for
Palestinians in between cities not only
lengthy and uh you know timec consuming
difficult but also many tell me that
they they're fearful that they're just
scared to travel around for the the
uptick in settler violence thew
correspondent Rebecca R Us there
reporting thank you very much
Rebecca